As a part of this course, we are supposed to do a small project in a group to explore more about technology and try to understand the concepts better which are thought in class by using the applications in our laptops. 
So, as a group of three members: Me, Sourav, and Sandeep decided our topic as " Airlines reservation systems: How do flights get booked? "
In that topic, we divide it into 3 subtopics as 
1) History and structure of airlines, 
2) Overbooking and passenger bumping, 
3) dynamic pricing and fare algorithm 

I am mainly focusing on Overbooking and passenger bumping. The airlines do overbooking to avoid flying empty seats, and it's been a practice for decades. 
Airlines have many reasons to overlook, that are passengers may cancel their tickets or last-minute changes in travel plans, which avoids the empty seats in flights. 
If there is no empty seat, the airlines also get the maximum revenue per flight, and reducing the number of empty seats in a flight leads to a lower price for other passengers.
Flights are expensive to operate, and every empty seat is a hard hit on the bottom line of the revenue. 

Overbooking happens, and all the people are present on the flight in that situation.
There are two cases: Voluntary bumping and involuntary bumping. 

Voluntary bumping: They suggest that travelers give up their seats in exchange for negotiated compensation for their inconvenience. 
The compensation includes: vouchers for flights like meals, transportation, hotel stays, etc, and cash refunds and future travel upgrades. 

Involuntary bumping: If passengers don't agree to give up seats, then they select who will not be boarding by using some criteria. 
The criteria are as follows: The lowest fare tickets are at the biggest risk of being bumped. The latest check-ins are often first to be denied boarding, and the highest tiers are rarely bumped. 
If you are travelling alone, you have a greater chance of getting bumped. 

Overbooking is effective in terms of revenue. Let us discuss how it is 
For example, let us consider a flight that has a 160-passenger capacity, which may generate $30,000 in ticket sales. If 10% of  those passengers cancel right before takeoff, then that airline would lose $3,000 per flight.
However, by overbooking by 10%, the airline compensates for those potential no-shows and can fill all the seats, recapturing that $3,000.
It is only about one flight, but daily thousands of flights will travel around the world, and airlines can increase revenue by tens of millions of dollars. 
So, overbooking strikes a balance between profitability and customer satisfaction. As the percentage of involuntary bumping is less. 

Airlines do not simply overbook flights by unrealistic numbers. They are booking on very specific, proven data for the exact flight. 
For the most accurate forecasts, there are many factors, are: Foot traffic at the airport, road traffic and weather conditions, public holidays, big business or entertainment events, the cost of compensation, and much more.   
To predict this, the airlines use many machine learning algorithms. For example, neural networks and from random forests and decision trees to gradient boosting. 

There is a Department of Transportation (DOT) in the US, which has regulations that require the airlines to compensate involuntarily bumped passengers with amounts based on the time of forced travel delay. 
0-1 hour delay - no compensation required, 1-2 hours delay - 200% of the one-way fare, more than 2 hours delay - 400% of the one-way fare. 
As the DOT in the US, there is an EU regulation in Europe. EU compensate based on distance so flights under 1,500 km -$275, flights between 1500-3500 km - $440, all other flights - $660. 

Till now, we have looked from the perspective of airlines, so now we look from the perspective of passengers. 
From the passenger's perspective, the overbooking can be a double-edged sword because if they bump involuntarily, then they have to miss the flight, and they want to change their plans accordingly. 
If some passengers have a  flexible schedule, then they get a jackpot by being bumped by getting a handful of perks as upgrading seats, vochers or even get some cash. 
If we look even deeper into the issue, passengers also benefit from the overbooking practice because it helps airlines keep airfares low, though most travelers are probably unaware of it.

In terms of the technological aspect : 
There are many machine learning algorithms to predict the number of seats for overbooking.
One of the algorithms I found is to accurately predict the cancellation of a booking by analyzing patterns in the available dataset. 
algorithm : 
Step 1: Take customer data as input 
Step 2: Preprocess the dataset for further analysis 
Step 3: perform visual analysis, feature engineering, and feature extraction on the dataset using a data analysis technique. 
Step 4: Use training data to train different machine learning models. 
Step 5: Use test data to evaluate the trained models. 
Step 6: Check if the accuracy of the models is satisfactory, then go to step 7, or else go to step 4
Step 7: Use parameter hyper-tuning to optimize the selected model.
Step 8: Use the optimized model to predict the outcome for the new unseen data.

I will honestly say that I don't understand it completely, as it is more technical in aspects. 






