# exploring-the-digital-technology- 
In the first class of this course, as a class activity, the whole class was divided into small groups, and we were asked to observe the technology on our campus and make a list of it. After that, we talked about the instruments in class. 
In this course, we study computer software, how binary values are attached to our files, how execution and storage happen in our software devices, and how binary bits change from 8 to 64 bits. 
We learn to convert binary to numbers and vice versa, both positive and negative numbers. 

We download Linux on our systems and learn to code with the command prompt, in which we open the files without double-clicking on our laptops.
After downloading the WSL, we learnt many codes, such as how to create a directory and a file and how to play with the directory and files. We also learned how to open our app using codes, not by double-clicking.

As part of the assignment, we did the presentations in small groups. In our group, we did a basic concept about computers in the book Computer Organization by Hamacher. In that, we discussed different computers and how the data, instructions, and memory work in different versions of computers . 
We also talked about the number representation in computers and how the different algorithms work in  the computer. 
Other groups in the class talk about different topics and use different software for their presentations. 
One of the software is Miro, which is a digital collaborative  platform designed to facilitate remote and distributed team communication and project management. 
Another tool is Prezi AI, this platform is a visual storytelling  software alternative to traditional slide-based presentation formats. So from the different groups I learnT differnt tools and concepts more related to today's technology. 

As a class involvement, our instructor will provide many questions which are new to learn and exictes us to know more about that topic for example finding to do the email for thousands of members at a time with their respective names.
I figured out how to do it using the Excel sheet attached to the mail, and sent it. 

We are using the git hub account, but we don't know how to work with git, so we learnt about that only in this course. How to add to git and commit to it, and using the gitk, we can see when we use the git file, did we make changes, and by that we can track when we edited our file. 

Next, we had a guest lecture about "artificial neural networks (ANN) ", what they are, how they work, and how they are formed by using logic gates and different mathematical operations like summation and differentiation. We compare the biological neuron to the artificial neuron, which is similar because we take the idea of an artificial neuron from the real neuron. 
We explore the new website called "playground.tensorflow.org", which is helpful to understand how the hidden layers and the number of neurons in the hidden layer affect the output. There are many applications of ANN in technology, like we use this in ChatGPT, open AI sources, facial recognition, robotics, and automation.
There are 3 steps in ANN: forward propagation, Loss, and backward propagation. 
We use ANNs for complex and non-linear relations and great pattern recognition, and as the base for deep learning. 

For the last two to three weeks, we have been working on our group project by selecting a topic that interests us more. Our group chose Airline reservation: How do flights get booked?  
As a group, we have three members, so we divide the topic into three subtopics: 
1) History and structure of airlines,
2) Overbooking and passenger bumping, 
3) Dynamic pricing and fare algorithm. 
We three are exploring all the topics, but we thought we could take one and give more focus to it, so  I chose overbooking and passenger bumping.

